Full text of "Army Talk Orientation Fact Sheet #64 - Fascism!" 
Image in pdf format Fascism64.pdf
1945 Full text of "Army Talk Orientation Fact Sheet #64 - Fascism!"


t RESTRICTED 3 




WAR DEPARTMENT— WASHINGTON 25, D. C. 



24 March 1945 



FASCISM! 



Note For This Week's Discussion: 

Fascism is not the easiest thing to identify and analyze; nor, once in power, is it easy to destroy. It is important 
for our future and that of the world that as many of us as possible understand the causes and practices of fascism, 
in order to combat it. Points to stress are: (1) Fascism is more apt to come to power at a time of economic crisis; 
(2) fascism inevitably leads to war; (3) it can come to any country; (4) we can best combat it by making our 
democracy work. 



You are away from home, separated from your 
families, no longer at a civilian job or at school 
and many of you are risking your very lives because 
of a thing called fascism. Our country was attacked 
by the fascist aggressor, Japan. The "Sons of Heaven" 
were promptly joined by their fascist partners of 
Germany and Italy. 

"Fascism" is a word that's been used a great deal 
these last few years. We come across it in our news- 
papers, we hear it in our newsreels, it comes up in 
our bull sessions. We've heard about the cruelties of 
fascism, its terror, its conquest of country after coun- 
try. We've heard of its concentration camps — like 
Dachau in Germany and its torture chambers — like 
Maidanek in Poland. We've heard of its planned 
mass murder of whole peoples — which scholars call 
"genocide." 

Some of the things that have been done to people 
by fascists seem too horrible to believe, especially to 
Americans who believe in "live and let live." Hard- 
boiled American correspondents, formerly skeptical, 
now believe because they have seen. (See page 6.) 

We Americans have been fighting fascists for more 
than three years. When Cecil Brown, one of the 
leading war correspondents, came back from the battle 
fronts, he went on a trip that took him into big cities 
and small towns all over America. He talked and 
listened to all kinds of people. He found that most 
Americans are vague about just what fascism really 
means. He found few Americans who were confident 
they would recognize a fascist if they saw one. 

And are we in uniform any more certain what 
fascism is — where it came from — what made it strong ? 



Do we know how fascism leads men to do the things 
done to people at Maidanek? Do we know how it 
leads them to attack helpless nations? Are Maidaneks 
and war inevitable results of fascism? Do all fascists 
speak only German, Italian or Japanese — or do some 
of them speak our language? Will military victory 
in this War automatically kill fascism? Or could 
fascism rise in the United States after it's been crushed 
abroad? What can we do to prevent it? 

Perhaps we ought to get to know the answers. If 
we don't understand fascism and recognize fascism 
when we see it, it might crop up again — under another 
label — and cause another war. 

Fascism is a way to run a country — it's the way 
Italy was run, and the way Germany and Japan are 
run. Fascism is the precise opposite of democracy. 
The people run democratic governments, but fascist 
governments run the people. 



Fascism is government by the few and for the few. 
The objective is seizure and control of the economic, 
political, social, and cultural life of the state. Why? 
The democratic way of life interferes with their meth- 
ods and desires for: (1) conducting business; (2) 
living with their fellow-men; (3) having the final say 
in matters concerning others, as well as themselves. 
The basic principles of democracy stand in the way 
of their desires; hence — democracy must go! Anyone 
who is not a member of their inner gang has to do 
what he's told. They permit no civil liberties, no 
equality before the law. They make their own rules 
and change them when they choose. If you don't 
like it, it's "T.S." 

They maintain themselves in power by use of force 



[1] 



combined with propaganda based on primitive ideas 
of "blood" and "race," by skillful manipulation of 
fear and hate, and by false promise of security. The 
propaganda glorifies war and insists it is smart and 
"realistic" to be pitiless and violent. 

(You may find the foregoing material a useful basis 
for a brief introductory talk J 



How It Starts 

(Question: How does fascism get in power? 
How can a violent program that enslaves the 
people win any support? ) 

Fascism came to power in Germany, Italy, and 
Japan at a time of social and economic unrest. A 
small group of men, supported in secret by powerful 
financial and military interests, convinced enough 
insecure people that fascism would give them the 
things they wanted. 

They did so partly by clever propaganda and de- 
ception. They promised the people that fascism would 
bring them great power and prosperity. The details 
differed from country to country but the general pat- 
tern was the same. The Japanese spoke of a "greater 
Asia co-prosperity sphere." Mussolini mouthed hu- 
manitarian ideals and promised a re-born Roman 
empire. Hitler and his associates adopted the name 
of National Socialist German Workers' Party (Nazi) 
and announced objectives that attracted many German 
people. The official title of the Nazi party was de- 
liberately worded for its propaganda value, appealing 
to "nationalists," "socialists," "workers," and all 
others who might be favorably influenced by these 
labels. At the very time that the fascists proclaimed 
that their party was the party of the "average citizen," 
they were in the pay of certain big industrialists and 
financiers who wanted to run the people with an 
iron hand. 

The fascists promised everything to everyone: They 
would make the poor rich and the rich richer. To 
the farmers, the fascists promised land through elimi- 
nation of large estates. To the workers they promised 
elimination of unemployment — jobs for all at high 
wages. To the small business men they promised 
more customers and profits through the elimination 
of large business enterprises. To big business men 
and the industrialists they secretly promised greater 
security and profits through the elimination of small 
business competitors and trade unions and the crush- 
ing of socialists and communists. To the whole 
nation they promised glory and wealth by conquest. 
They asserted it was their right, as a "superior people," 
to rule the world. 

As soon as these methods had won them enough 
of a following to form their Storm Troops, the fascists 
began using force to stifle and wipe out any opposi- 



tion. Those who saw through the false front of fascism 
and opposed them were beaten, tortured, and killed. 

The fascists knew that all believers in democracy 
were their enemies. They knew that the fundamental 
principle of democracy — faith in the common sense 
of the common people — was the direct opposite of 
the fascist principle of rule by the elite few. So they 
fought democracy in all its phases. At the same time 
that they proclaimed the "superiority" of the Germans, 
the Italians, the Japanese, they proclaimed also that 
the German, the Italian, the Japanese peoples were 
really unfit to rule themselves. It became "Ileil 
Hitler" in Germany, and "Believe, obey, fight" in Italy. 

They played political, religious, social, and eco- 
nomic groups against each other and seized power 
while these groups struggled against each other. 



How It Works 

(Question: How could the fascists keep their 
contradictory promises, once they got in poicer? 
How did their program actually work out?) 

It was easy enough for the fascists to promise all 
things to all people before they were in power. Once 
they were actually in power, they could not, of course, 
keep their contradictory promises. They had intended 
in advance to break some, and they did break those 
they had made to the middle classes, the workers, and 
the farmers. 

As soon as the fascists were in control of the gov- 
ernment, the torturings and the killings were no longer 
the unlawful acts of a political party and its hoodlum 
gangs. They became official government policy. 
Among the first victims of this official policy were 
those farmers, workers, and small business men who 
had believed the promises that had been made to 
them and who complained that they had been "sucked 
in." Some simply vanished. Often they came home 
to their families by return mail in little jars of ashes. 

The concentration camps and graves filled with the 
opponents of fascism. Out went equality before the 
law, free elections and free political parties, inde- 
pendent trade unions and independent s ools, free- 
dom of speech and freedom of the press, and, in time, 
freedom of religion. 

Pastor Niemoeller was thrown into a concentration 
camp in Germany; Cardinal Innitzer was "stoned," 
and Catholic priests were imprisoned. Jews were 
murdered in cold blood and synagogues destroyed 
Christian ministers were ousted from Japan. 

The fascists "solved" unemployment by converting 
their nations into giant war machines. Ti unem 
ployed were either conscripted into the army or or 
ganized in labor battalions and put to work in war 
plants. 



[2] 



Deprived of their unions, the working people could 
be driven to work longer and harder for less and less 
money, so that those who subsidized and ran fascism 
could grow richer. By wiping out all internal com- 
petition — especially the small and medium sized busi- 
ness firms — profits were increased still higher for the 
handful on top. In some cases, the fascists then 
gobbled control of the top corporations. The living 
standards of the masses of the people declined, of 
course. As they earned less and less, they were able 
to buy less and less of the goods they produced. 

Every last detail of life was regulated, with the 
death penalty often imposed for slight violations. One 
unhappy victim complained: "Fascism is a regime 
under which everything not prohibited is compulsory," 

Once the fascists were in control of the government, 
not even the gang on top was safe from its own mem- 
bers. There would be more loot and power per fascist 
leader if some fascist leaders were eliminated. Some 
of the party "big-shots" and some of those who had 
helped them take over were therefore "purged." Many 
would-be partners in the dictatorship, including somie 
industrialists, wound up in jail, in exile, or dead. 



Fascism = War ? 

(Question: If we leave fascist nations alone, 
will they leave us alone? Or does fascism in- 
evitably lead to war?) 

We have seen that the people of a fascist state earn 
less and less, and so are able to buy less and less of 
the goods they produce with their slave labor. This 
means that eventually the fascist leaders either have 
to abandon the system, or look abroad for new mar- 
kets to dispose of the mounting surplus of goods that 
cannot be sold at home. 

The fascists do not choose to abandon their system 
and give up their graft, and so they are forced to 
acquire foreign markets and to eliminate competing 
nations. Due to their slave labor, the fascists are able 
to undersell the free nations of the world. The free 
nations must either resort to fascism, so that with 
slave labor they can meet the cut-throat prices of the 
fascist nations, or they must erect trade barriers to 
keep out the ruthless fascist competition. (See Douglas 
Miller: You Can't Do Business With Hitler!) In 
either case, the fascist nation still wants the markets, 
and it goes after them with the same methods used in 
domestic affairs — intimidation, terror, and force. In 
foreign affairs, force means war. 

The war machine is ready, and waiting for duty. 
To justify the building of the war machine as the 
"solution" to unemployment, the fascists nurture a 
lust for war, a desire for conquest. "Live danger- 
ously," said Mussolini. "Man has become great 
through perpetual strife," screamed Hitler. A Nazi 



slogan was "Guns instead of butter." The hungry 
people were told they would get butter and other 
riches in due time — by way of conquest. 

The press, radio, movies, stage — all were put to 
the task of glorifying war. The school system, from 
kindergarten to university, justified and exalted tyr- 
anny of the strong over the weak. "The school is 
the preparation for the Army," said the Nazi Minister 
of Education. 



a 



m- 



The people were taught that their race was "su 
perior." Since this concept of "superior" and " 
ferior" race is completely contrary to the findings of 
all science, science has to be as carefully controlled 
and perverted as the schools. No scientist in Germany 
could safely deny it when Hitler told the Germans that 
they were a "Master Race" entitled to the land and 
possessions of lesser folk. The Italians were told in 
fake "scientific" terms that Latins were born to rule. 
The Japanese were taught that as "Sons of Heaven" 
it was both their right and their duty to conquer and 
rule the world. 

Once their people were sold on the "master race" 
idea, it was easy for the fascists to make them feel 
that other people were of no more consequence than 
vermin. We think nothing of killing a cockroach. 
They were encouraged to think nothing of killing 
unarmed and defenseless men, women, and children. 
Many even got to enjoy it. Hence Rotterdam, Lidice, 
Maidanek. 

By all these devices, fascism creates and then is 
driven by forces that cannot be stopped at will. Fas- 
cism cannot stand still. Its internal and external 
policies are rooted in aggression. It must expand or 
explode. It must conquer or perish. Every measure 
taken by fascism — its entire economic, social, political, 
and military set-up — means eventual war. 

The war comes when intimidation and terror fail 
as instruments of fascist foreign policy. The war 
comes when other nations finally refuse further to 
appease the insatiable hunger of fascism for markets, 
military glory, and world domination. 



Can It Happen Here? 

Some Americans would give an emphatic "No" to 
the question "Can fascism come to America after it 
has been defeated abroad?" They would say that 
Americans are too smart, that they are sold on the 
democratic way of life, that they wouldn't permit any 
group to put fascism over in America. Fascism, some 
might say, is something peculiar that you find only 
among people who like swastikas, who like to listen 
to speeches from balconies in Rome, or who like to 
think that their emperor is god. Their reaction might 
be that it is something "foreign" that Americans 
would recognize in a minute, like the goose-step. They 



[3] 



might feel that we'd laugh it out of existence in a 
hurry. 

(Question: Do all fascists come from Ger- 
many, Japan, or Italy?) 

In a good many European nations, the people felt 
the same way some of us do: that fascism was foreign 
to them and could never become a power in their land. 
They found, however, that fascist-minded people 
within their borders, especially with aid from the 
outside, could seize power. The Germans, of course, 
made efficient use of fascist-minded traitors whom we 
have come to know generally as "the fifth column." 

In France, which was considered a leading democ- 
racy of Europe, the betrayal was spearheaded by a 
powerful clique of native "100 percent French" fas- 
cists. Norway had its Quisling who was as "pure- 
blooded" a Norwegian as Laval was a "pure-blooded" 
Frenchman. The Netherlands' Musserts were "100 



percent Dutch," Belgium's Degrelles "100 percent 
Belgian," and Britain's Mosleys "100 percent British." 
The United States also has its native fascists who say 
that they are "100 percent American." There were 
native fascists in the Philippines, in Thailand (Siam) , 
in China, in Burma, in many other countries — all 
waiting to become the willing puppets of the Axis. 
Not one of these fascists is a "foreigner" who had to 
be imported from Germany, or Japan, or Italy. 

(Question: Have any groups in America used 
fascist tactics and appeals? ) 

Most of the people in America like to be good 
neighbors. But, at various times and places in our 
history, we have had sorry instances of mob sadism, 
lynchings, vigilantism, terror, and suppression of civil 
liberties. We have had our hooded gangs, Black 
Legions, Silver Shirts, and racial and religious bigots. 
All of them, in the name of Americanism, have used 
undemocratic methods and doctrines which experience 
has shown can be properly identified as "fascist." 

Can we afford to brush them off as mere crackpots? 
We once laughed Hitler off as a harmless little clown 
with a funny mustache. 

In January 1944, 30 Americans, many of them 
native born, were indicted by a Federal Grand Jury 
on charges of conspiring with "the Nazi party to ac- 
complish the objectives of said Nazi party in the 
United States." These objectives, according to the 
indictment, included undermining and impairing "the 
loyalty and morale of the military and naval forces 
of the United States." The case ended in a mistrial 
caused by the death of the presiding judge. The 
question of re-indictment is still under consideration. 

Whenever free governments anywhere fail to solve 
their basic economic and social problems, there is 
always the danger that a native brand of fascism will 
arise to exploit the situation and the people. 



Can We Spot It? 

(Question: How can we identify native Ameri- 
can fascists at work? ) 

An American fascist seeking power would not* pro- 
claim that he is a fascist. Fascism always camou- 
flages its plans and purposes. Hitler made demagogic 
appeals to all groups and swore: "Neither I nor 
anybody in the National Socialist Party advocates 
proceeding by anything but Constitutional methods." 

Any fascist attempt to gain power in America would 
not use the exact Hitler pattern. It would work under 
the guise of "super-patriotism" and "super-American- 
ism." Fascist leaders are neither stupid nor naive. 
They know that they must hand out a line that "sells." 
Huey Long is said to have remarked that if fascism 
came to America, it would be on a program of "Ameri- 



canism. 



» 



Fascists in America may differ slightly from fascists 
in other countries, but there are a number of attitudes 
and practices that they have in common. Followin 
are three. Every person who has one of them is not 
necessarily a fascist. But he is in a mental state that 
lends itself to the acceptance of fascist aims. 

1. Pitting of religious, racial, and economic groups 
against one another in order to break down national 
unity is a device of the "divide and conquer" tech- 
nique used by Hitler to gain power in Germany and 
in other countries. With slight variations, to suit 
local conditions, fascists everywhere have used this 
Hitler method. In many countries, anti-Semitism 
(hatred of Jews) is a dominant device of fascism. In 
the United States, native fascists have often been 
anti-Catholic, anti-Jew, anti-Negro, anti-Labor, anti- 
foreign-born. In South America, the native fascists 
use the same scapegoats except that they substitute 
anti-Protestantism for anti-Catholicism. 

Interwoven with the "master race" theory of fas- 
cism is a well-planned "hate campaign" against mi- 
nority races, religions, and other groups. To suit 
their particular needs and aims, fascists will use any 
one or a combination of such groups as a convenient 
scapegoat. 

2. Fascism cannot tolerate such religious and ethi- 
cal concepts as the "brotherhood of man." Fascists 
deny the need for international cooperation. These 
ideas contradict the fascist theory of the "master 
race." The brotherhood of man implies that all 
people — regardless of color, race, creed, or nationality 

■have rights. International cooperation, as expressed 
in the Dumbarton Oaks proposals, runs counter to the 
fascist program of war and world domination. 

In place of international cooperation, the fascists 
seek to substitute a perverted sort of ultra-nationalism 
which tells their people that they are the only people 



[4] 



in the world who count. With this goes hatred and 
suspicion toward the people of all other nations. Right 
now our native fascists are spreading anti-British, 
anti-Soviet, anti-French, and anti-United Nations prop- 
aganda. They know that allied unity now foretells 
the certain defeat of fascism abroad. They know that 
post-war allied unity means world peace and security. 
They realize that fascism cannot thrive or grow under 
these conditions. 

3. It is accurate to call a member of a communist 
party a "communist." For short, he is often called a 
"Red." Indiscriminate pinning of the label "Red" on 
people and proposals which one opposes is a common 
political device. It is a favorite trick of native as 
well as foreign fascists. 

Many fascists make the spurious claim that the 
world has but two choices — either fascism or com- 
munism, and they label as "communist" everyone 
who refuses to support them. By attacking our free 
enterprise, capitalist democracy and by denying the 
effectiveness of our way of life they hope to trap 
many people. 

Hitler insisted that only fascism could save Europe 
and the world from the "communist menace." There 
were many people inside and outside Germany and 
Italy who welcomed and supported Hitler and Musso- 
lini because they believed fascism was the only safe- 
guard against communism. The "Red bogey" was a 
convincing enough argument to help Hitler take and 
maintain power. The Rome-Berlin-Tokyo Axis, whose 
aggressions plunged the world into global war, was 
called the "Anti-Comintern Axis." It was proclaimed 
by Hitler, Mussolini, and Hirohito as a "bulwark 
against communism." 

Learning to identify native fascists and to detect 
their techniques is not easy. They plan it that way. 
But it is vitally important to learn to spot them, even 
though they adopt names and slogans with popular 
appeal, drape themselves with the American flag, and 
attempt to carry out their program in the name of 
the democracy they are trying to destroy. 



for a scapegoat as a way out. Fascism is always 
ready to provide one. In its bid for power, it is 
ready to drive wedges that will disunite the people 
and weaken the nation. It supplies the scapegoat — 
Catholics, Jews, Negroes, labor unions, big business 
— any group upon which the insecure and unemployed 



How To Stop It 

(Question: How can we prevent fascism from 
developing in the United States?) 

The only way to prevent fascism from getting a 
hold in America is by making our democracy work 
and by actively cooperating to preserve world peace 
security. 

Lots of things can happen inside of people when 
they are unemployed or hungry. They become fright- 
ened, angry, desperate, confused. Many, in their 
misery, seek to find somebody to blame. They look 




can be brought to pin the blame for their misfortune. 

We all know that many serious problems will face 
us when the War is over. If there is a period of 
economic stress it will create tensions among our 
people, including us as returning veterans. The resent- 
ment may be directed against minorities — especially 
if undemocratic organizations with power and money 
can direct our emotions and thinking along these 
lines. 

The fascist doctrine of hate fulfills a triple mission. 
By creating disunity — it weakens democracy. By get- 
ting men to hate rather than to think — it prevents men 
from seeking the real cause and a democratic solution 
to the problem. By fake promises of jobs and se- 
curity, fascism then tries to lure men to its program 
as the way out of insecurity. Only by democratically 
solving the economic problems of our day can there 
be any certainty that fascism won't happen here. That 
is our job as citizens. 

Citizenship in a democracy is more than a ballot 
dropped in a box on Election Day. It's a 365-days- 
a-year job requiring the active participation and best 
judgment of every citizen in the affairs of his com- 
munity, his nation, and his country's relations with 
the world. 

Fascism thrives on indifference and ignorance. It 
makes headway when people are apathetic or cynical 
about their government — when they think of it as 
something far removed from them and beyond their 
personal concern. The erection of a traffic light on 
your block is important to your safety and the safety 
of your children. The erection of a world organiza- 
tion to safeguard peace and world security is just as 
important to our personal security. Both must be the 
concern of every citizen. 

Freedom, like peace and security, cannot be main- 
tained in isolation. It involves being alert and on 
guard against the infringement not only of our own 
freedom but the freedom of every American. If we 
permit discrimination, prejudice, or hate to rob 
anyone of his democratic rights, our own freedom 
and all democracy is threatened. 

What is true of America is true of the world. The 
germ of fascism cannot be quarantined in a Munich 
Brown House or a balcony in Rome. If we want to 
make certain that fascism does not come to America, 
we must make certain that it does not thrive any- 
where in the world. 



Next Week: HAVE WE THE MANPOWER FOR THE JOB AHEAD? 



[5] 



Aids For Discussion Leaders 



A short five to ten-minute introductory talk by the 
discussion leader is recommended. Suggested points: 

A. We're at war because of "fascism." 

B. Many Americans are vague about the meaning 
of "fascism;" many doubt the horrible things we hear 
about places like Dachau and Maidanek. 

C. What is fascism? 



D. Fascism is a dictatorship — the opposite of 
democracy. 

E. Fascism is an authoritarian government by the 
few. 

F. Fascists stay in power by force; by propaganda 
based on ideas of "blood" and 
of war; and by false promises of security. 



"race" and the glories 



Because of the importance of Supplementary Material, 
the Outline For Discussion is omitted this week. 






Supplementary Material 



I. Are the stories of German fascist 
cruelties true? 

"Genocide" Death Camps. One of the most 
diabolical weapons used by the Nazi fascists is tech- 
nically referred to as "genocide" (from the Greek 
genos for "race" and the Latin cide for "killing") 
in "Axis Rule In Occupied Countries" by Raphael 
Lemkin, published by the Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace, 1944. It means simply war 
against whole peoples, including innocent non-com- 
batants and women and children. The idea behind 
it is to wipe out or cripple for generations entire 
racial groups and nations. It aims to disintegrate 
political and social institutions, culture, language, 
national feelings, religion, and economic existence 
as well as at wholesale murder of individuals. By 
weakening enemies, it is designed to win the peace 
even if the war is lost. (See ARMY TALK No. 49.) 
Maidanek. "I have just seen the most terrible 
place on the face of the earth — the German concen- 
tration camp at Maidanek, which was a veritable 
River Rouge for the production of death, in which 
it was estimated by Soviet and Polish authorities that 
as many as 1,500,000 persons from nearly every 
country in Europe were killed in the last three years. 
. . . This is the place that must be seen to be be- 
lieved. I have been present at numerous atrocity 
investigations in the Soviet Union, but never have 
I been confronted with such complete evidence, 
clearly establishing every allegation made by those 
investigating German crimes. After inspection of 
Maidanek, I am now prepared to believe any story 
of German atrocities, no matter how savage, cruel 
and depraved." 



Asia. It is not a government based on the consent 
of the governed. It is not a union of ordinary, self- 
respecting men and women to protect themselves and 
their freedom and their dignity from oppression. It 
is an unholy alliance of power and pelf to dominate 
and enslave the human race." 

President Roosevelt, 29 December 1940. 



a 



\ . . to sum up, I see two diametrically opposed 
principles: the principle of democracy, which, wher- 
ever it is allowed practical effect is the principle of 
destruction; and the principle of authority of person- 
ality which I would call the principle of achieve- 
ment. . . ." — Adolph Hitler, 27 January 1942. 



III. 



ful financial 



and military interests supported the Ger 
man and Italian fascists? 

t 

Fritz Thyssen, the wealthiest of the German in- 
dustrialists, admitted giving the Nazis funds as early 
as 1928. In his book, / Paid Hitler, written after 
leaving Germany, he wrote: "It was during the last 
years preceding the Nazi seizure of power that the 
big industrial corporations began to make their con- 
tributions. . . . All in all, the amounts given by heavy 
industry to the Nazis may be estimated at two mil- 
lion marks a year. It must be understood, however, 
that this includes only the voluntary gifts. . . ." 

Of Italy, Sumner Welles, former Under Secretary 
of State, writes that "especially the reactionary ele- 
ments and the larger banking and industrial interests, 
welcomed the dictatorship of Mussolini. ..." 



W. H. Lawrence, N. Y. Times, 30 August 1944. 

II. Are democracy and fascism dia- 
metrically opposed? 



TV 



/ 



"Fascism . . . believes neither in the possibility 
nor in the utility of perpetual peace. . . . War alone 
brings up to their highest tension all human energies 
and puts the stamp of nobility upon the peoples who 
have the courage to meet it. For Fascism the ten- 
a United States of Europe or a United States of dency to Empire, that is to say, to the expansion of 

r'6] 



The 



nations, is a manifestation of vitality; its opposite, 
staying at home, is a sign of decadence." 

■Benito Mussolini, 1932. 

% 

V. What is a scapegoat? 



"Any animal or person to whom sins, evils, ill 
luck, etc., is ceremonially attached, the victim then 
being sacrificed or driven out, as symbolic of dis- 
pelling the evils. Hence, a person or thing being 
blamed for others." 

Webster's International Dictionary. 

VI. What is the difference between 
Communism and Fascism? Aren't they 
essentially the same? 

In any discussion on fascism there will be some 
who will argue that there are strong similarities 
between fascism and communism. Under both sys- 
tems, there is neither freedom of speech nor of press 
as we know it. Both forms of government permit 
only one political party. Both have a secret police. 
But beyond this, there are important and funda- 
mental differences in philosophy, aims, purposes, and 
methods. 

In their systematic destruction of all opposing 
groups, Hitler and Mussolini had the communists first 
on their list. Among the early opponents of fascism, 
the communists were in the forefront. 

Let us take three fundamental concepts — War and 
Peace, Race, and The Purpose of the State — and see 
how the two systems stack up. Since the Soviet 
Union is associated in most minds with communism, 
and is the only working example, reference is fre- 
quently made to Soviet practice in the comparison 
with characteristic fascist practice. 

War and Peace 

We have seen how, by its economic and political 
structure, fascism means war. Fascism — whether in 
Germany or Japan or Italy — has never been secretive 
about its glorification of war and its aim of world 
conquest. With the conquest of Ethiopia, Austria, 
Czechoslovakia, Manchuria, Poland, Norway, Den- 
mark, Greece, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Bul- 
garia, Rumania, Yugoslavia — fascism came close to 
achieving its goal. This was one time when fascism 
meant to make good its promise. 

While the early leaders of communism in the 
Soviet Union advocated world revolution, Stalin 
modified that policy in 1927. He exiled Trotsky 
and others who opposed his position that the great- 
est Soviet contribution to world socialism would be a 
demonstration to the world that socialism would 
work in one country. On the record, the avowed 
Soviet policy has been peace through international 
collective security, if possible, or strong defenses by 
its own efforts if collective security failed. Originally 



excluded from the League of Nations, the Soviet 
Union joined in 1934. During the next five years 
it took a strong stand for collective action against 
aggression. After the Munich sell-out in September, 
1938, pursuing its realistic policies, the Soviet looked 
to its own protection. The Soviet made a non-aggres- 
sion pact with Germany in 1939 which the Nazis broke, 
and a five-year non-aggression pact with Japan in 
1941. Through pledges at the conferences at Moscow, 
Teheran, and Yalta, and through daily repetitions to 
its people, the Soviet has reaffirmed its aim as lasting 
peace through international cooperation. 
• This attitude toward peace has been recognized 
by leading Americans. Former Under Secretary of 
State Sumner Welles said: "When the Soviet Union 
entered the League of Nations, even the most obstinate 
were soon forced to admit that it was the only major 
power which seemed to take the League seriously." 
Donald Nelson, former chairman of the War Pro- 
duction Board, stated: "I know from what I saw 
and heard in Russia that the leaders and the people 
of that great country are anxious to work with us. 
They know that only world cooperation and enduring 
peace can produce the rapid internal development 
of Russia which is their main concern." 



"No, we do not need to fear Russia. We need to 
learn to work with her against our common enemy, 
Hitler. We need to learn to work with her in the 
world after the war. Russia is a dynamic country, a 
vital new society, a force that cannot be bypassed in 
any future world," 

Wendell Willkie in "One World. 



55 



"Our countries are joined together in a high cause 
and I fully share your confidence that the unity of 
purpose which binds our peoples and countries to- 
gether in the prosecution of the war will be trans- 
lated into a close and lasting collaboration together 
with other likeminded countries in the establishment 
of a just and enduring peace." 

— President Roosevelt to Soviet Ambassador, 
4 October 1943. 

Race 

The peoples of fascist nations are led to believe 
that they are the "master race," or "Herrenvolk, 
superior to all other peoples, and that it is their 
divine mission to dominate the earth. Fascism created 
and exploited racial hates to acquire a following, to 
disunite nations, and to enslave the peoples of Eu- 
rope and Asia: 

The only differences which exist are those be- 
tween the Nordic humans on one side and the animals, 
including the non-Nordic humans and the inferior 
humans on the other side. 

Dr. H. Gauch, leading German racial theorist in: 
New Basis of the Racial Sciences, 1935. 



»j 



if 



55 



£71 



In old Russia, under the Czars, most of the 189 
national minorities who lived there were persecuted 
and oppressed. National languages were forbidden 
and education was suppressed. It is generally con- 
ceded that today, in the Soviet Union, there is no 
such thing as racial discrimination in theory or in 
practice. Unlike Nazi law, which enforces discrimi- 
nation on "racial" grounds, Soviet law punishes the 
establishment of direct or indirect privilege for citi- 
zens on account of their race or nationality as well 
as the advocacy of racial or national exclusiveness, 
hatred or contempt: 

"Article 123: Equal rights for citizens of the 
USSR, irrespective of their nationality or race, in all 
spheres of economic, state, cultural, social and poli- 
tical life, shall be an irrevocable law. 

"Any direct or indirect limitation of these rights, 
or conversely, any establishment of direct or indirect 
privileges for citizens on account of their race or 
nationality, as well as any propagation of racial or 
national exclusiveness or hatred and contempt, shall 
be punished by law." 

[Chapter X — The New (Soviet) 
Constitution of 1936.] 

The Purpose of the State 

The political fascist state is based on the "leader 
principle," under which the people must follow 
blindly the dictates of a few men. In the Axis 
countries, the emergence of fascism meant a taking 
away of self-government. As fascism grows more 
powerful it permits its people less and less liberty and 
uses more and more violence. 

The Soviets early believed that a dictatorship "of 
the proletariat" was necessary in order to destroy 
capitalism and set up socialism; that then the dic- 
tatorship should gradually evolve into a democracy, 
as now provided in their Constitution. Thus, al- 
though they now have a secret police and a govern- 
ment controlled press, their ultimate political ideals 
are directly opposite to the stated ideals of fascist 
dictatorship, and their hope is to drop the appur- 
tenances of dictatorship in the process of democratic 
evolution. 

Fascism treats women as mere breeders. "Children, 
kitchen, and church" was the Nazi slogan for women. 
The Soviet Union granted political and economic 
equality to women in an unprecedented degree: 

"Article 122: Women in the USSR are accorded 
equal rights with men in all spheres of economic, 
state, cultural, social and political life. 

The realization of these rights of women is en- 
sured by affording women equally with men the right 
to work, payment for work, rest, social insurance and 



46 



education, and by state protection of the interests of 
mother and child, pregnancy leave with pay, and the 
provision of a wide network of maternity homes, 
nurseries and kindergartens." 

[Chapter X — The New (Soviet) 
Constitution of 1936.] 

The German school system, once the pride of the 
German people, degenerated under fascism to an in- 
strument of ignorance and hate. Between 1932 and 
1937, the number of Germans attending universities 
decreased more than 50 percent. Before World War 
I, only 33 percent of the Russians could read or write. 
Today, illiteracy is almost absent in the Soviet Union. 
Between 1914 and 1937, the number of Soviet men 
and women in colleges increased 800 per cent: 

"Article 121: Citizens of the USSR have the 
right to education. This right is ensured by uni- 
versal compulsory elementary education, by educa- 
tion free of charge including higher education, by 
a system of state stipends for the overwhelming ma- 
jority of students in higher schools, by instruction in 
schools in the native language, and by the organiza- 
tion in factories, state farms, machine-tractor sta- 



farms 



and agricultural education for the working people." 

— [ Chapter X — The New (Soviet) 
Constitution of 1936.] 

Economic 

We have seen that, under fascism, the productive 
energies of Germany, Italy, and Japan were turned 
to war preparations under the slogan of "guns in- 
stead of butter." 

The communists believe in state ownership of fac- 
tories, farms, and all other productive agencies, with 
distribution of the proceeds among all the workers 
according to their productivity. The Russians have 
great confidence in the future improvement of their 
lot, although the average Russian is poor in com- 
parison to American standards. Russians are now 
confident that their upward march will be rapidly re- 
sumed with the end of the War, the resumption of 
production for civilian use, and the expansion of their 
great resources. 

Conclusion 

Our late ambassador to Germany, William E. Dodd, 
wrote before the War: "Their (the Nazi) persecu- 
tions are quite as severe as those of the 16th cen- 
tury. . . . Treatment of people is more arbitrary 
than it has been since the Middle Ages." He added 
prophetically: "What is to come of all this one can- 
not say — German domination of all Europe or an- 
other war." 



E RESTRICTED] 



Prepared by Army Orientation Branch, Information and Education Division, ASF [A.G. 353 (16 Jan. 44)] 



U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE B98124 


